Good morning.
You got anyone else?
Shall I introduce myself?
Yes, I'm Peter Cameron.
Yeah. So another person. Great.
Mm-mm.
I'll just see if there's anyone else to set up. That's it. Right.
Look, good morning. Welcome to the Governance and Administration Select
Committee. We're here to talk about the petition of David
Glenn on behalf of the Cornwall Park Leaseholders Association,
mandatory compensation to leasees for the value of their improvements.
So we have 15 minutes with you as the Cornwall Park Leaseholders
Association, and that will be followed by 15 minutes with the
Cornwall Park Trust Board.
It's the time, the 15 minutes is yours, but we would love it if you left some time
at the end for us to be able to ask some questions.
That would be much appreciated. Thank you, and over to you.
Tena koutou, talofa. Greetings, and thank you to the Select Committee
for hearing our submission. Going to talk fast.
My name is Peter Cameron. I work as a South Auckland GP.
I've lived with my family in a Cornwall Park leasehold property since
2000. I'm acting chairperson of the Cornwall Park Leaseholder
Association. And with me are other members of the committee,
Gautham Jindal, Tania Blinkhorn, and also Mr.
Don Tillbrook, an expert in the history of the Cornwall Park leases.
And we represent approximately 70 leaseholders out of the approximate
87 remaining.
What we want is your help to find a solution in a difficult situation.
It is possible to create a win-win for both
leaseholders and the Cornwall Park Trust.
As we will show you, the new leases are unaffordable to the extent that
virtually every leaseholder will have to walk away from their
homes. We want leaseholders to be able to stay in their properties,
and we believe this will work best for the Cornwall Park Trust's
finances to support their excellent work to maintain the
park, which is a national taonga.
What we request from the Select Committee is that you act on an established
precedent and recommend to Parliament a re-examination of the
Cornwall Park leases situation along the lines of the Lusk report.
I'll explain soon what we mean by that.
So I'll talk for a few minutes and leave, hopefully, plenty of time for questions.
We'll explain why virtually no leaseholder can possibly renew their
lease, even the proposed 3%, 4%,
5% version, and why the situation benefits
neither the Cornwall Park Trust board nor the leaseholders, and how
you, as the subcommittee, can assist to put the situation back on track
by doing the same thing as your predecessors did in the
1980s.
This is an expensive document, the Park
Board's submission. Looking to have input by legal
teams and a PR machine, and it has many cherry-picked facts.
And, I just request, please don't let it sidetrack you
from your understanding of what's essentially a really simple situation,
which is that approximately 80 leasehold properties
are yet to come up for lease renewal in the next five to seven years,
and 59 of these properties are coming up for renewal by the end of
2030.
The leases are called Glasgow leases.
They're structured so that the annual lease cost is fixed at
5% of the land value.
This is paid then annually over 21 years.
The problem is the land value. This
determines the annual cost
of the lease.
Whetuangia Road represents the middle of the range of the
value of properties in the trust portfolio.
So this is a graph showing the property
value of houses in Whetuangia Road
that are equivalent to the Park Board's properties, many of
which are included.
They are larger sites.
As you can see, in the '20s,
when the leases started, the value of the properties was
about 2,400.
By
1980, 80,000.
Coming up to 2020, two to 3
million. 2025,
three to 5.5 million.
I hope you can see that.
And that is really the problem in a nutshell.
Because the value of the property has gone up so much over the
last couple of decades, a 5% lease at
present would cost a leaseholder
150 to 275,000
per year.
This would be the new annual lease cost for families whose
average family income is around 150,000 a year.
The park's proposed a 3%, 4%, 5% offer you
might have read about. But even with that, the first seven
years,
a leaseholder is looking at
90,000 Ks per year, and then it rises to finish at
150 the last seven years. So I'm sure if you
put yourself in these people's situations, it's not surprising
that every leaseholder has to leave their property.
Furthermore, the leases are not just unaffordable to the
leaseholder, but they're unaffordable to anyone else.
No one will buy a leased property with a scale of annual cost.
The properties are practically
unsaleable.Virtually all of the houses that have been
sold have been sold back to the Cornwall Park Trust or one
of its subsidiary companies for very low figures.
Cornwall Park Trust was recently buying these properties at
185K, which they call the backstop offer.
This is more than the market would pay due to the
unaffordable lease, but with few exceptions, much less than the
leaseholder originally paid for the property, which they've
subsequently maintained or improved.
Once the Cornwall Park Trust has the properties back, it can't lease them.
They can now only rent them out, where they earn
less and pay much more in expenses than they would earn
with a reasonable lease.
So this situation is exactly the same as when Parliament
previously took action.
In Epsom in the 1980s,
big trusts like the Dilworth Trust and the St John's Anglican Trusts
were turning over their Glasgow's leases.
There's hardly any Glasgow leases left anymore.
At a time when land prices had increased astronomically,
similar to the graph I demonstrated.
Large numbers of leaseholders were unable to afford the 5% leases and were
having to leave their homes with minimal ability to sell.
Parliament took notice and
the impact it was having on so many people, so the Minister of Justice
commissioned the Lusk Report.
The Lusk Report went on to recommend various solutions,
including the legal provision for compensation for
value of improvements when people had to leave their properties
under these circumstances.
And the results of these recommendations were very satisfactory.
No law needed to be passed because the Dilworth and St John's Trust
voluntarily changed their systems, in most case
by offering a right of freehold, and this
worked extremely well for their finances going forward.
Members of the select committee, please be aware of the
real human cost to these families whose leases are
still coming up for renewal in the next three to five
years. Over
80 households means that hundreds of people are affected.
Years of worrying as to how they can possibly afford the new lease,
years of daily concern about their virtual loss of equity, which means
they may never be able to buy a property again.
The Leaseholders Committee knows of cases of bankruptcy, of insolvency,
of people going to live in tiny homes on their children's properties,
of couples approaching 80 years old having to keep working to
pay their lease. And we also know
of a suicide that was said to have been triggered by the stress of this
situation. We can see no sense
or benefit to the Cornwall Park Trust in continuing in this direction.
Why are they not taking action?
There seem to be only two possible reasons.
One is that they don't believe that people are going to have to walk away
from their properties, and the second is that they're taking
advantage of the situation to acquire these properties at very cheap rates,
and if so, this is unconscionable and
inequitable.
We sincerely hope the Cornwall Park Trust doesn't continue to make the same
mistake it did with the Auckland Showgrounds lease, where they
refused to believe the lessee who said repeatedly that what was proposed was
unaffordable.
And
the board were intransigent, the lessee walked
away. This was a very expensive mistake for the
trust board and reputationally damaging for its members,
and was devastating for several businesses who were dependent on the Showgrounds.
So in summary,
the
leases are unaffordable.
There is a parliamentary pre-precedent from the '80s and early
'90s for taking action, and so we request that the
select committee recommend to Parliament a formal
review of the lease situation along the lines of the Lusk Report.
So, we're open to questions.
Peter, could I ask-- Thank you very much for that, and I do have some questions.
But just when you held up that graph at our end,
the screen went a bit fuzzy, but it looks like it's fine
now. So could you hold that graph up again, please? Yes, that's perfect. Thank you.
Yeah.
Just so we can see that-
So the-- Yeah, the orange is the average house price in Auckland,
and the blue is the prices
in Whareroa Road. And it's a sort of an example of the
catch up of value of as
property, so the
cost of property rises as, I call it
Epsomization, as the expensive
properties ex--
Suburbs expand.
That's great.
Yeah.
Thanks, Peter. I really appreciate that.
Just it did go a bit fuzzy at that point.
So I've got a question from Andy Foster, and he--
I'll hand over to him for that question.
Peter, thank you.
Just wanted to find out what the situ-- So there's obviously a big change there
in the rate at which the
value has gone up for your properties vis-à-vis other properties in
the area. Is there anything particular in terms of the nature of the
zoning,
any restrictions on the use of the land?
Is it subject to any parks management plan? Anything of that nature.
And how is, to your knowledge, how is it being valued by the
trust board?
So those are very big questions with a lot of history around
them.
In principle, there's no difference to other sort of
quarter acre properties. Since the
land was subdivided by Logan Campbell, it's essentially in
quarter acre lots.
The lease has
restricted the ability to further
subdivide the lots.
And so the value of the property is actually
equivalent to
unimproved bare land in
the eastern suburbs.
This is probably a distraction, but there's been a long history
of
the leaseholder society also
negotiating with the park board that it's not really
fair to
assess the value of the land from which 5% is
taken as unimproved land value in the eastern
suburbs.
But that's-
Yeah.
That's what it is, yeah.
Where I was trying to go, Peter, is are they valuing it on, essentially what it
sounds like is they're valuing it on what's usually called the highest and best
use, assuming the ability to subdivide.
Exactly.
Assuming the ability to develop intensively.
My question is whether that's actually permitted by the zoning, well,
it
clearly doesn't sound as though it's permitted by your lease conditions because
they don't let you do it. And whether it's also subject to
anything like a parks management plan, which says, "Look, we don't want to have
high rise buildings," whatever it might be, around the outskirts of Cornwall
Park.
So Don, are you able to comment on that?
So my-
Yes.
Thanks, Don.
This has been the subject of quite a lot of
court action, actually. And
the thinking was, well, how can you charge the rent on the
highest and best use,
and at the same time restrict that use?
And
there was a dissenting opinion by the Chief Justice, but
the other justices in the Supreme Court
allowed it through. So,
it is
assessed on the highest and best use,
and we are restricted in what we can do with it.
Okay. That's helpful. Thank you.
Thank you. I've got a question here from Tom Rutherford.
Thank you very much. I want to come to point nine in the petition,
which says hardworking Kiwi families who have called these leasehold properties
their home for several decades will be forced out of their homes and will
be inadequately compensated for the capital improvements.
I'm slightly playing devil's advocate here.
Can you tell me, when you make, or when the property owners make
the capital improvements, did they know at the time that they lived on leasehold
land?
Yes. Yes, they did.
So what's happened with the acceleration in value,
is that the previous 80 years of historical
precedent has changed. So it used to be said
that, yes, of course, you're taking a risk in buying leasehold land, but
from
cycle to cycle of the leases renewing every 21
years,
the properties tended to sell for about 50% of
freehold value. And because the leases, the land was going up
in more of a linear way,
and the lease costs were more predictable,
the leases were affordable. And so, for
example, with my place, I've
perhaps stupidly done quite a lot of renovation work.
It's a beautiful place that backs onto the park.
And most leasehold properties were similar.
You can drive down, for example, Mangakiekie Ave, where
I live, and you can see the leasehold properties generally as well
maintained as the freehold ones.
But the ones that are reverted to rental
are starting to have a completely different look.
I guess my line of questioning is around,
I can sympathize with the situation at hand.
Yes, I understand.
But when you-
It's okay
... purchase in a situation like this, and you have leasehold land, this is
the element of risk that you take on by doing so,
versus when you purchase a property that is freehold, for example.
And so I'm just--
It's not like this was not known at the time of
purchase. Yes, the circumstances may have changed around how they enforce
the leases, but it's not like that it was leasehold
land has suddenly appeared out of nowhere, and that was a risk
that the purchasers took on at the time of purchasing the property.
Yeah, that's a very good point. And, that is how
anyone sensible would think.
The issue is with the Glasgow lease,
we've taken on a Glasgow
lease, a lease structure which has now died
out all over the world,
where the value of
the lease payable is absolutely
fixed to the value of the land. The Cornwall Park,
we want to talk with them about changing the lease.
They've come up with a couple of
options which are almost as expensive.
The value of the lease has not got any kind of commercial reality
like a normal lease, which involves negotiation
and acceptance. So we've got people who are in their
homes, and all of a sudden, they're being asked for 150,000,
200,000 a year.Now, this
situation, your predecessors did
find unpalatable,
and we're asking you to
make a simple recommendation that this is
not a situation just of commercial agreement and
Parliament interfering with a commercial contract.
It's really a situation of
an archaic lease format that
in the past when this has come up, the
lessor, in other words, the trusts, have seen that and
have taken action.
We want-
Thank you
... we don't want everyone-- Yeah.
Thank you. We have come to the end of your time now.
I did let that run a little bit longer because those questions were
important. But we're now going to move to the Cornwall Park
Trust Board. So thank you for your input there, and
we will now move to
the other side of this equation. Thank you.
Thank you.
We don't have the Cornwall Park Trust Board-
Oh
... with us.
We don't seem to have them with us.
So we may have to reschedule them.
Sorry. They're outside.
They're here. No, they are here. They're outside waiting for
us.
Do we say
Thank you, Brinda.
We should-
That was a face I wasn't expecting to see.
I just was listening and I was like,
"What?"
She can stay on the call though, Madam Chair.
So you can-
She doesn't have the camera.
Oh.
No.
So,
yeah. They'll sort that.
Yeah. It's fine.
Just listening.
But somebody else is back.
Mm-hmm.
So welcome.
Thank you.
Did you see that?
Yes.
See the-
We-- Yes, we-
Yeah
... on our phones.
Right.
Oh, yeah. Heard everything.
You could have actually come in, so I'm sorry about that.
No, we're all ears.
We didn't realize you were sitting outside. You would've been welcome in here.
Thank you.
Thank you, and it's good that you did see it.
So we have 15 minutes with you now, and I shall hand over to you
for your presentation.
Thank you.
And,
""".
My name is Adrian Young-Cooper, and I'm the chair of the Cornwall Park
Trust Board.
With me is Murray Reid, CEO of the Cornwall Park Trust
Board, and Martina Llewellyn, commercial manager who
administers the leasehold, and John Hannon, behind me, legal
counsel who's advised the Trust Board for almost 20 years.
Cornwall Park is a much-loved, heavily used
park that includes a sheep and beef farm in the middle of
Auckland.
Everyone who uses the park will agree it's a true jewel in the
crown among Auckland parks. It is
uniquely beautiful and elegant and a large city
park.
It provides a large island of tranquility for a wide
range of forms of recreation, sports grounds,
picnics, venues for weddings, running, walking,
cycling, and a cafe, a restaurant, and an ice cream parlor.
It provides a haven for both native and exotic
flora and is an inland island for bird life.
Uniquely, it is also a working farm where
families and other users can access a rural experience
in the middle of the city.
The park was the gift in
1901 of Sir John Logan Campbell,
125 years ago, who arrived in Tāmaki
Makaurau
as a ship's surgeon from
Scotland via Sydney. He saw the light and came to New Zealand,
in 1840.
His vision was a park of this nature.
He also provided in 1908 a land
endowment to his trustees to fund the development and operation of the
park. The income from the endowment lands
providing a fringe around the
park.
From the establishment of the park, these endowment properties have been leased
to provide income to develop and maintain the park.
The park operates no cost to local and central government.
The petitioners submit from the perspective of their personal
wishes and a desire to improve their personal financial
position, a position they entered into freely on the
market and with full knowledge.
Essentially, they want the ability to sell their leasehold interest for a
price higher than the market presently bears.
Their public agitation may, in our view, have damaged the market's
perception of these perpetual leaseholds.
We, the trustees of the board, have legal fiduciary
duties to the deed of trust established in 1901
and statutory trustee duties under the laws of New Zealand to
preserve and enhance the assets and income of the trust,
both the parkland and the endowment land.
The economics of perpetually renewable leases with
fixed rent for 21 years, which is then reset each
21 years based on land value,
are affected by general inflation, the property price cycle, and
interest rates.
This is, and always was, inherent in the nature of these
leases.
Land subject to such leases is recognized as a sensible and
conservative capital investment for trust boards.
Most of the leasehold properties front onto or are closely
adjacent to Cornwall Park.From a leaseholder's perspective,
purchasing a perpetually renewable leasehold is a less
costly way of gaining secure tenure of a property in a highly
desirable area than buying freehold.
In some periods, inflation has significantly eroded
the value of the rent income to the trust board over
particularly the last parts of the 21-year lease term.
In such periods, ground leases can be a very good deal for the
lessee compared with the cost of borrowing to purchase an
equivalent freehold property.
In other periods, property price inflation is or has
been such that the rent increases sharply
at the 21-year rent reset.
We recognize that this may cause hardship to some lessees
depending on their circumstances.
We have regularly made, and continue to make, significant
concessions where lessees do suffer hardship.
At the same time, we must adhere to our fiduciary duty
to preserve the assets and income of the trust.
We have progressively taken steps to modernize and modify the
lease terms to assist lessees.
In 2021, we specifically offered a substantial discount
on the normal ground rent of 5% of land value
to 3% for the first seven years, 4% for the next seven
years, reverting to 5% for the last seven years.
We offered a backstop purchase
to the lessee, of the lessee interest, to
66 owner-occupier leaseholds if they
chose not to renew their
leases.
30 lessees have taken up the offer or are in the
process of doing so.
Other steps are explained in the written submissions.
It's not correct that leasehold interests do not sell.
Our written submission contains a table outlining sales of leases
over the past 10 years. But from the petitioner's perspective,
the prices realized may not meet their expectations.
These are open market transactions and reflect how the real
estate market in Auckland values the lessee
interest being transacted.
What petitioners request Parliament to do would be fundamentally
unconstitutional confiscation of private assets.
We have provided two opinions to that effect from Sir Geoffrey
Palmer, New Zealand's most eminent constitutional lawyer, in our
written submissions.
Sir Geoffrey Palmer said it would be particularly offensive for Parliament to
legislate to deal with the situation of an individual trust
board. The petitioners seem to ask for legislation to deal
with the perpetually renewable ground leases generally.
This would affect many lessors across not just Auckland, but throughout New
Zealand.
We provide some details of the likely widespread effect in our written
submissions.
Comparisons with UK legislation dealing with leasehold
property are not appropriate. The UK
legislation deals with a different set of problems.
This is explained in our written submissions.
We continue to engage in dialogue with leaseholders and the leaseholders'
association. We have offered changes to lease
structures. We have provided concessions to assist
lessees who may have difficulties.
We will continue to be open to changes that do not breach our fiduciary
duties as trustees of Cornwall Park.
But it would be in breach of our legal fiduciary duties, and fundamentally
unfair, for us to make the changes that the leaseholders
request.
In closing, I again reference Sir Geoffrey Palmer.
It would also be constitutionally obnoxious for
Parliament to legislate to adjust private contracts
to force the changes the petitioners request on all
lessors of ground leases. And just one
comment. I don't want to go into all the comments that
the petitioners made, but they made some comments about the showgrounds, and
as we're not looking at the showgrounds today, I refute all those
statements, and the facts were not correct as they were described
to you.
Thank you. And thank you very much for your presentation.
I do have some questions, and the first one comes from Andy Foster.
Look, thank you, and unfortunately, we don't have your original written submission
in front of us.
No.
So apparently it was given to us some weeks ago, and then
I don't think any of us have actually got it.
So we might have to go and refer back to that.
But the-
We will. We'll make sure that we put... Yeah.
Yes. We will do that. Can I just check?
So we've heard that leases are likely to go
to levels sort of 90, 100, 150, even
$200,000 per property. What are you seeing the
likelihood is when they're revalued,
which is in the next few years? And then once it's got to that value,
if you said 90,000, is that it's the 3%, and then
it will be 120,000, then it'll be 150,000.
Are those roughly the kind of numbers that you're seeing?
It does depend entirely on the value of the land
at the time.
Can you give us a range of what you're actually seeing?
So,
what are our most recent valuations, Martina?
Our recent valuations have been
starting at 60,000. But that also depends on the size of
the land value.
Yep. No, I understand.
Or the size of the land of the plot.
Yep.
And then there are the discounted rent, which is the
3%, 4%, and 5%. That is for eligible
leases up until December 2028. They were
eligible for that
So you start at 60 and go up to-
Then it's discounted for 3% of that.
Okay.
So the actual land value is, when the value is established, it's 5%.
Yes.
Then we provide an internal discount to eligible leases.
And then it's discounted to went down to 45,000
the first seven years, and then it went up that much.
Okay. So your range is from 60. Forget the discount bit for the moment.
Mm-hmm.
Your range is 60 to what?
Well, it-
Would be, roughly
... it depends on the,
just to be... The value of the land is set by two
valuers.
Yes.
And if they can't agree, then there's an, they appoint an umpire.
So-
Yeah. You heard the question about highest and best use?
Yeah. So, I should just clarify that yes, that is the
law that was tested all out.
But how much is the top limit? It's a really-
Oh, okay.
It's going to be-
So,
it is a formula that relates-
No, how much is it?
How much.
What's the dollar value?
We do not know because it depends.
Yeah.
Mangakiekie Avenue property is valued regularly.
What are you getting today for it?
But we-
You must know what you're getting today.
But we...
Okay, so just-
Right.
Sorry.
The,
it is always the outcome of the valuation process.
The most recent valuation of a
single family home property was-
Was in Campbell Road.
And how much was it?
That was at 60,000.
No, how much was the actual valuation that was agreed, the unimproved
value?
I think I'd have to get back to you.
Could you get back to us with that? Because it would be really good.
Yeah. I think it'll be good to, it would be good to get a bit of a picture.
Sure.
Okay. So there's the other part.
Sure. Yeah.
Just that whole picture.
Yes, sure.
Yeah.
We, yes, we will provide the committee with-
Yeah. That would be wonderful. Thank you
... the last three or four valuations.
And the expect, and expected ones. Yeah.
What the unimproved land value.
That would be very helpful. Yeah.
I think it's also the expected ones, because the whole thing is the change that's
happened.
The clarifications of-
Oh, clarifications.
Yeah. I think what we're looking for is not just the land value.
Mm-hmm.
But we're actually wanting to know how much leases these tenants have actually paid
per those-
Sure
... properties.
Sure. We can-
So you claimed at 200,000.
Well, that's speculation about a future value.
Mm.
Which has not yet been determined.
That's all I'm saying, is that it's a, there is a process.
We can tell you the actual valuations that have been completed in the
last five years.
That would be helpful.
That would be helpful, yeah.
And then what the actual ground rent is.
Yeah.
I've got a question from Tom, but as this is-
Just another quick question. Can we also...
Look, because you're talking about the land value.
Mm-hmm.
But they're-
I understand.
These people have purchased a leasehold.
That's all gone.
Land that actually has property.
Mm-hmm.
And they're not actually... It's a leasehold property that they actually own.
Yes.
And they're actually not able to develop the land.
So, they're looking at their homes that they can't even renovate, and
they have actually put improvements on the property, which is actually leasehold.
Technically, most people, when they buy a leasehold, they don't actually put a lot
of money into it.
Correct.
But, it's not something that you've actually taken care of.
These tenants have done that. So what we're actually wanting to know is what's the
value of the land, because potentially those people who live around Cornwall Park,
they have massive properties with lots of land, but their properties are not
necessarily that big either. So we'd like to know what the valuation of the
houses are without the improvements, if you have those.
Mm-hmm.
You would definitely have those data.
Yes, we do. Mm-hmm.
So, what are those property values plus the land value,
and you are actually charging lease,
are based on the land value. So we just want to get facts-
Yes
... together so we can actually assess what's going on.
Sure.
That'd be great. Thank you. Um, Andy-
Can I just finish? Yeah. Can I just...
The other part that they said is, look, if, they've said that a number of people,
and it'll be good to know how many, have walked away from leases.
What then happens with those properties?
What do you do, and what's the revenue stream that you get from those,
vis-à-vis the revenue stream that you get from leasing them out?
Okay. So,
the first thing, it's, if we just look at the
recent past,
we have had a look at how many, at what has happened with-
Yeah
... with properties in the last 10 years.
And so I think-
Thank you.
From 2015 to 2025, there have been 20
expiries. We've had seven that have renewed.
We have three that have sold on the market separately.
We've had seven that have taken up the backstop offers for the eligible leasees.
Sorry, I didn't hear what the-
Sorry.
So you very softly spoke about it.
That option that you were talking, what was that?
What's the backstop option?
The backstop option was available for
leasees who have resided in their properties from the 30th of
September 2020,
and they'd been longstanding leasees.
So they were invited to apply for the backstop offer,
which essentially was, what it is, is if you chose
not to or
wished to have an option to sell your leasehold interest, that
you could take up the backstop offer which the trust board offered
on all lease, leasehold interests.
So what's that?
That are owner-occupiers.
That are owner-occupied.
And those leasees, that wished to,
took up that offer.
That's the 180K, isn't it?
Yes.
Yeah.
And they applied.
So the question really I was getting to is when that
happens, those people take... So that's 20 expiries.
That counts for 17 of them.
Let's leave it at that point. But what happens with those properties and what's
the-
Yes.
What does the trust do?
What does your master plan-
Sure, yeah
... what does your master plan say you're allowed to do?
Yes.
If anything.
Okay. So-
And what's the revenue stream you get from those properties
vis-à-vis what you're getting from leasing them?
The,
in the terms of the lease, which were put in place in the
1920s, there are provisions
with respect to if a person chooses not to
renewBecause it is their choice.
If they choose not to renew, then there is an
auction process,
which we have tried to modernize, but it was written in
1920, and
if the auction is unsuccessful, the property reverts to the Trust
Board.
We then
basically ensure the home is in reasonable
order. Often there's some refurbishment needed, and we make them
available as homes for Aucklanders on a rental basis.
And the revenue stream from the rental versus lease?
It depends on the particular property.
It doesn't
have as much
operating cash flow on the day one
as a residential rental versus ground lease.
But over the time of a 21-year period, which is the
term of a perpetual lease, residential rental actually
is a reasonable return. So you have to have a very long-term view on these things.
Okay. We have gone a bit over, but I do have a question from Tom, and I'd like to
take it.
Yep.
And then we'll finish there.
Sure. Thank you. So property comes on the market. I go to view the property.
Uh-huh.
Am I told at that time that the property is on a leasehold
arrangement?
Yes.
The real estate agents in Auckland are very well used to
leasehold. There's a lot of leasehold in Auckland,
and also the Trust Board, before it will
sign the
reassignment of the lease requires that purchaser of the lease, the
interest, has received legal advice as to what the
obligations and pluses and minuses of leasehold are.
So as a prospective buyer, I would know that this
is the element of
purchasing the property that I am taking into my consideration.
I could purchase a freehold property further down the road.
Yes.
I could purchase this one on the leasehold land.
And that is the decision that I make as the buyer.
Yes.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you.
Sophon, just very quick.
Go ahead.
Do the new purchasers know how much leasehold payment they
need to actually...
Yes.
Yes. On their purchase.
Mm. Right.
The ground lease has been set. It was set
21 years prior or 10 years prior.
Yeah. So they know that the next
lot of leases are coming up at a specific time.
And they know exactly when the next renew is.
Right.
Well, thank you very much.
Thank you.
It's been very good. I was in Cornwall Park in the weekend, and it is
an absolutely beautiful place. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you much also for the work that you do-
Mm.
To help maintain such an amazing space.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Sure.
If, Chair, for any further